APPENDIX A
CBT Resources
For principles of CBT, worksheets, videos, conceptualization diagrams, the case summary outline, and the Cognitive Therapy Rating Scale and manual, visit beckinstitute.org/CBTresources.

TRAINING PROGRAMS
The Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy in suburban Philadelphia offers a variety of on-site, off-site, and online training programs for individuals and organizations worldwide, along with supervision and consultation programs (beckinstitute.org).

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
* Worksheet packet
* Client booklets
* Books, CDs, and DVDs by Aaron T. Beck, MD, and Judith S. Beck, PhD
* Videos with Aaron T. Beck, Judith S. Beck, and Beck Institute clinicians

BECK CBT CERTIFICATION
Information about the Beck CBT Certification program and certified clinician’s directory (in press).

CONNECT WITH THE BECK INSTITUTE
* Monthly newsletter with CBT tips, news, and announcements
* Blog with articles from Beck Institute leadership and faculty
* Links to the Beck Institute’s social accounts

ASSESSMENT MATERIALS
The following scales and manuals may be ordered from Pearson (www. pearsonassessments.com):
* Beck Youth Inventories of Emotional and Social Impairment® (BYI®)— Second Edition (for children and adolescents ages 7–18)
* ??Beck Anxiety Inventory® (BAI®)
* Depression Inventory® (BDI®)
* Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation® (BSS®)
* Beck Hopelessness Scale® (BHS®)
* Clark–Beck Obsessive–Compulsive Inventory® (CBOCI®)
* BDI®—Fast Screen for Medical Patients

The following scales and manuals can be found at www.beckinstitute.org:
* Personality Belief Questionnaire
* Personality Belief Questionnaire—Short Form
* Dysfunctional Attitude Scale





APPENDIX B
Beck Institute Case WriteUp
SUMMARY AND CONCEPTUALIZATION
PART ONE: INTAKE INFORMATION
Identifying Information at Intake
Age: 56
Gender Identity and Sexual Orientation: Male, heterosexual Cultural Heritage: American with European heritage
Religious/Spiritual Orientation: Belongs to the Unitarian Church; was not attending church at intake
Living Environment: Small apartment in large city; lives alone
Employment Status: Unemployed Socioeconomic Status: Middle class

Chief Complaint, Major Symptoms, Mental Status, and Diagnosis
Chief Complaint: Abe sought treatment for severe depressive symptoms and moderate anxiety.
Major Symptoms
Emotional: Feelings of depression, anxiety, pessimism, and some guilt; lack of pleasure and interest
Cognitive: Trouble making decisions, trouble concentrating
Behavioral: Avoidance (not cleaning up at home, looking for a job, or doing errands), social isolation (stopped going to church, spent less time with family, stopped seeing friends)
Physiological: Heaviness in body, significant fatigue, low libido, difficulty relaxing, decreased appetite

Mental Status: Abe appeared to be quite depressed. His clothes were somewhat wrinkled; he didn’t stand or sit up straight, made little eye contact, and didn’t smile throughout the evaluation. His movements were a little slow. His speech was normal. He showed little affect other than depression. His thought process was intact. His sensorium, cognition, insight, and judgment were within normal limits. He was able to fully participate in treatment.

Diagnosis (from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders or the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems): Major depressive disorder, single episode, severe, with anxious distress. No personality disorder but mild obsessive–compulsive personality disorder features.

Current Psychiatric Medications, Adherence, and Side Effects; Concurrent Treatment
Abe was not taking psychiatric medication and was not receiving any treatment for his depression.

Current Significant Relationships
Although Abe had withdrawn somewhat from his family, his relationship with his two grown children and four school-age grandchildren were good. He sometimes visited them or attended his grandchildren’s sporting events. He had a great deal of conflict with his ex-wife and had completely withdrawn from his two male friends. He was relatively close to one cousin and less so to one brother. He saw and spoke to his other brother and his mother infrequently and didn’t feel close to them.

PART TWO: HISTORICAL INFORMATION
Best Lifetime Functioning (Including Strengths, Assets, and Resources)
Abe was at his best when he finished high school, got a job, and moved into an apartment with a friend. This period lasted for about 6 years. He did well on the job, got along well with his supervisor and coworkers, socialized often with good friends, exercised and kept himself in good shape, and started saving money for the future. He was a good problem solver, resourceful and resilient. He was respectful to others and pleasant to be around, often helping family and friends without being asked. He was hardworking, both at work and around the house. He saw himself as competent, in control, reliable, and responsible. He viewed others and his world as basically benign. His future seemed bright to him. He also functioned highly after this time, though he had more stress in his life after he married and had children.
History of Present Illness
Abe developed depressive and anxious symptoms 2½ years ago. His symptoms gradually worsened and turned into a major depressive episode about 2 years ago. Since that time, symptoms of depression and anxiety have remained consistently elevated without any periods of remission.

History of Psychiatric, Psychological, or Substance Use Problems and Impact on Functioning
Abe became quite anxious about 2½ years ago when his supervisor changed his job responsibilities and provided him with inadequate training. He began to perceive himself as failing on the job and became depressed. His depression increased significantly when he lost his job 6 months later. He withdrew into himself and stopped many activities: helping around the house, doing yard work and errands, and seeing his friends. His wife then became highly critical, and his depression became severe. He had not had any problems with alcohol or other substances.

History of Psychiatric, Psychological, or Substance Abuse Treatment, Type, Level of Care, and Response
Abe and his wife had had three joint outpatient marital counseling sessions with a social worker about 2 years ago; Abe reported it did not help. He reported no other previous treatment.

Developmental History (Relevant Learning, Emotional, and Physical Development)
Abe had no relevant difficulties in his physical or emotional development or in his school performance.

Personal, Social, Educational, and Vocational History
Abe was the oldest of three sons. His father abandoned the family when Abe was 11 years old, and he never saw his father again. His mother then developed unrealistically high expectations for him, criticizing him severely for not consistently getting his younger brothers to do homework and for not cleaning up their apartment while she was at work. He had some conflict with his younger brothers who didn’t like him “bossing” them around. Abe always had a few good friends at school or in the neighborhood. After his father left, he developed a closer relationship with his maternal uncle and later with several of his coaches. Abe was an average student and a very good athlete. His highest level of education was a high school diploma. Abe started working in the construction industry in high school and had just a few jobs in the industry between graduation and when he became depressed. He worked his way up in customer service until he became a supervisor. He got along well with his bosses, supervisors, and coworkers and had always received excellent evaluations until his most recent supervisor.

Medical History and Limitations
Abe had a few sports-related injuries in high school but nothing major. His health was relatively good, except for moderately high blood pressure, which he developed in his late forties. He didn’t have any physical limitations.

Current Nonpsychiatric Medications, Treatment, Adherence, and Side Effects
Abe was taking Vasotec, 10 mg, 2 ??per day, with full adherence to treat high blood pressure. He had no significant side effects. He was not receiving any other treatment.

PART THREE:
THE COGNITIVE CONCEPTUALIZATION DIAGRAM (CCD)
See pages 44–54.




PART FOUR: THE CASE CONCEPTUALIZATION SUMMARY
History of Current Illness, Precipitants, and Life Stressors
The first occurrence of Abe’s psychiatric symptoms began 2½ years ago when Abe began to display mild depressive and anxious symptoms. The precipitant was difficulty at work; his new supervisor had significantly changed his job responsibilities, and Abe experienced great difficulty in performing his job competently. He began to withdraw from other people, including his wife, and started spending much of the time when he was home sitting on the couch. His symptoms steadily worsened and increased significantly when he lost his job and his wife divorced him, about 2 years ago. His functioning steadily declined after that. At intake, he was spending most of his time sitting on the couch, watching television, and surfing the web.

Maintaining Factors
Highly negative interpretations of his experience, attentional bias (noticing everything he wasn’t doing or wasn’t doing well), lack of structure in his day, continuing unemployment, avoidance and inactivity, social withdrawal, tendency to stay in his apartment and not go out, increased self-criticism, deterioration of problem-solving skills, negative memories, rumination over perceived current and past failures, and worry about the future.

Values and Aspirations
Family, autonomy, and productivity were very important to Abe. He aspired to rebuild his life, to recapture his sense of competence and ability to get things done, to get back to work, to become financially stable, to reengage in activities he had abandoned, and to give back to others.

Narrative Summary, Incorporating Historical Information, Precipitants, Maintaining Factors, and Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram Information
For most of his life, Abe demonstrated many strengths, positive qualities, and internal resources. For many years he had had a successful work history, marriage, and family. He had always aspired to be a good person, someone who was competent and reliable and helpful to others. He valued hard work and commitment. His strongly held values led to adaptive behavioral patterns of holding high expectations for himself, working hard, solving his problems independently, and being responsible. His corresponding intermediate beliefs were “If I have high expectations and work hard, I’ll be okay. I should solve problems myself. I should be responsible.” His core beliefs about the self were that he was reasonably effective and competent, likeable, and worthwhile. He saw other people and his world as basically neutral or benign. His automatic thoughts, for the most part, were realistic and adaptive.
   But the meaning Abe put to certain adverse childhood experiences made him vulnerable to having his negative beliefs activated later in life. His father left the family permanently when Abe was 11 years old, which led him to believe that his world was at least somewhat unpredictable. His mother criticized him for failing to reach her unreasonably high expectations. Not realizing her standards were unreasonable, Abe began to see himself as not fully competent. But these two beliefs weren’t rock solid. Abe believed that much of his world was still relatively predictable and that he was competent in other ways, especially in sports.
    As an adult, when Abe began to struggle on the job, he became anxious, fearing that he wouldn’t be able to live up to his deeply held values of being responsible, competent, and productive. The anxiety led to worry, which caused difficulties in concentration and problem solving, and his work suffered. He started to view himself and his experiences in a highly negative way and developed symptoms of depression. His core belief of incompetence/ failure became activated, and he began to see himself as somewhat helpless and out of control. His negative assumptions surfaced: “If I try to do hard things, I’ll fail”; “If I ask for help, people will see how incompetent I am.” So, he began to engage in dysfunctional coping strategies, primarily avoidance. These coping strategies helped maintain his depression.
    Failing to be as productive as he thought he should be and avoiding asking for help and support from others, along with harsh criticism from his wife for not helping around the house, also contributed to the onset of his depression. He interpreted his symptoms of depression (e.g., avoidance, difficulty concentrating and making decisions, and fatigue) as additional signs of incompetence. Once he became depressed, he interpreted many of his experiences through the lens of his core belief of incompetence or failure. Three of these situations are noted at the bottom of the Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram.
    Once Abe became depressed, he started to view other people differently. He feared that they would be critical of him, and he withdrew socially. Historically, he had seen his world as potentially unpredictable. After losing his job and his wife blindsiding him, he began to view his world as less safe (especially financially), less stable, and less predictable.

PART FIVE: TREATMENT PLAN
Overall Treatment Plan
The plan was to reduce Abe’s depression and anxiety, improve his functioning and social interactions, and increase positive affect.

Problem List/Client’s Goals and Evidence- Based Interventions
Unemployment/get a job. Examined advantages and disadvantages of looking for similar job as before versus initially getting a different job (one that would be easier to obtain and perform), evaluated and responded to hopeless automatic thoughts (“I’ll never get a job and even if I do, I’ll probably get fired again”), problem-solved how to update résumé and look for a job, and role-played job interview.

Avoidance/reengage in avoided activities. Scheduled specific tasks around the house to do at specific times and did behavioral experiments to test his automatic thoughts (“I won’t have enough energy to do this”; “I won’t do a good enough job on this”). Evaluated and responded to automatic thoughts (such as “Doing this will just be a drop in the bucket”). Scheduled social activities and other activities that could bring a sense of pleasure. Taught Abe to give himself credit for anything he did that was even a little difficult and keep a credit list.

Social isolation/reconnect with others. Scheduled times to get together with friends and family; assessed which friend would be easiest to contact, evaluated automatic thoughts (“He won’t want to hear from me”; “He’ll be critical of me for not having a job”), discussed what to say to friend about having been out of touch, and did behavioral experiments to test interfering thoughts.

Ongoing conflict with ex-wife/investigate whether improved communication skills can help/decrease sense of responsibility for divorce. Taught communication skills such as assertion and did behavioral experiments to test thoughts (“It won’t make any difference; she’ll never stop punishing me/being mad at me”). Did a pie chart of responsibility.

Depressive rumination and self-criticism/reduce depressive rumination. Provided psychoeducation about symptoms and impact of depression, evaluated beliefs about deserved criticism, evaluated positive and negative beliefs about rumination and worry, did a behavioral experiment to see impact of mindfulness of the breath, and prescribed mindfulness exercise each morning and during the day as needed.

PART SIX: COURSE OF TREATMENT AND OUTCOME
Therapeutic Relationship
At the beginning of treatment, Abe was concerned that I might be critical of him, and he thought he should be able to overcome his problems on his own. I provided him with my view: that he had a real illness for which most people require treatment, that his difficulties stemmed from his depression and didn’t indicate anything negative about him as a person, and that it was a sign of strength that he was willing to see if treatment could help. He seemed to be reassured. He demonstrated a level of trust in me from the beginning; he was open about his difficulties and collaborated easily. Initially, when he reported what he had accomplished on his Action Plans, he was skeptical when I suggested that these experiences showed his positive attributes. But he was able to recognize that he, too, would see these activities in a positive light if someone else in his situation had engaged in them. Abe mostly provided positive feedback at the end of sessions. He was able to appropriately let me know when I misunderstood something he said. In summary, he was able to establish and maintain a good therapeutic relationship with me.

Number and Frequency of Treatment Sessions, Length of Treatment
Abe and I met weekly for 12 weeks, then every other week for 4 weeks, and then once a month for 4 months, for a total of 18 sessions over 8 months. We had standard 50-minute CBT sessions.

Course of Treatment Summary
I suggested, and Abe agreed, that we work first on (1) getting Abe to get out of his apartment almost every day, (2) spending more time with his family, and (3) cleaning up his apartment. Doing these things increased his sense of connectedness and his sense of control and competence (and decreased his belief that he was incompetent and somewhat out of control). (Later we worked on spending more time with friends and volunteering.) Increasing his social activities improved his social support and fulfilled his important values of close relationships and being helpful and responsible to other people. We also worked on decreasing his depressive rumination. Once he was functioning somewhat better, we worked on finding employment; he started off by doing construction for his friend’s business. Our final goal was to see if he could improve his relationship with his wife—but he could not.

Measures of Progress
Abe scored 18 on the PHQ-9 and 8 on the GAD-7 at intake, and his sense of well-being on a 0–10 scale was 1. I continued to monitor progress by using these three assessments at every session. At the end of treatment, his PHQ-9 score was 3, his GAD-7 score was 2, and his sense of well-being score was 7. Although he still had some days that were difficult, on more days than not, he felt much better.

Outcome of Treatment
Abe’s depression was almost in remission at the end of weekly treatment. He subsequently got a full-time job that he liked and did well in, was more engaged with friends and family, and felt much better. When he returned for his last monthly booster session, his depression was in full remission, and his sense of well-being had increased to an 8.

APPENDIX C
Steps in the AWARE Technique
1. Accept anxiety. Anxiety is natural, normal, and necessary for survival.
The sensations you experience are a normal part of anxiety, even when
they become intense. Anxiety increases when you get anxious about feeling anxious. But just because you feel anxious doesn’t necessarily mean
there’s anything wrong. Your brain reacts in the same way whether it perceives actual danger or imagined danger. You can view anxiety as energy,
given to help you deal with dangerous or difficult situations. Don’t try to
avoid, suppress, or control anxiety. If you do, it will become more intense
and prolonged.
2. Watch it from a distance. Look at it without judgment—not good, not
bad. Rate it on a 0–10 scale, and watch it go up and down. Be detached.
Remember, you are not your anxiety. The more you can separate yourself from the experience, the more you can just watch it. Look at your
thoughts, feelings, and actions as if you’re a friendly, but not overly concerned, bystander.
3. Act constructively with it. Act as if you aren’t anxious. Whatever you can
do without anxiety, you can do it with it. You can hold a conversation,
do chores, walk, drive, exercise, dance, sing, pray, and write with anxiety. Breathe slowly and normally. Don’t run away from anxiety or avoid
anxiety-provoking situations. If you do, you give yourself the message that
anxiety is bad or dangerous.
4. Repeat the above. Continue to Accept, Watch, and Act constructively with
the anxiety.
5. Expect the best. Most of the time, what you most fear doesn’t happen.
Give yourself lots of opportunities to use the steps above so you can gain
confidence that anxiety always decreases. And your difficulties with anxiety will decrease once you stop fighting it or trying to avoid or control it.

APPENDIX D
Restructuring the Meaning of Early Memories through Experiential Techniques
I have put techniques to restructure the meaning of early experience in an appendix because they are more advanced and may not apply to many of your clients. These Gestalt-type techniques have been adapted to the cognitive model, specifically to change dysfunctional beliefs, and are more often used with clients with personality disorders than with clients who have acute disorders, though not exclusively so. You use these techniques toward the middle or end of treatment, when clients have already begun to modify their dysfunctional beliefs. Note that it may be important for some clients to focus more heavily on recalling positive memories and deriving positive meanings to fortify their adaptive beliefs about themselves, their worlds, and/or other people. I present two ways to restructure the meaning of memories below.

Technique 1: Restructuring the Meaning of Early Experience through Reenactment and Therapist–Client Role Play. Below, I first ask Abe about a distressing situation, suggesting he focus on the somatic sensations attached to his negative emotion to activate his core beliefs and distress more intensely. I do this so he can gain greater access to an earlier memory with the same theme.

Judith: Abe, you look pretty down today.
Abe: Yeah. My ex-wife called. I was supposed to babysit for my grandchildren this morning, but I had to cancel at the last minute because I had forgotten I had a doctor’s appointment.
Judith: What did she say to you? Abe: That I’m a terrible grandfather.
Judith: What went through your mind when she said that? Abe: She’s right. I am a terrible grandfather.
Judith: And how are you feeling?
Abe: [expressing her emotion] Sad. Real sad. [expressing his core belief] I’m such a failure.
Judith: Just as a grandfather or overall? Abe: It feels like overall.
Judith: [heightening his affect to facilitate memory retrieval] Do you feel this sadness and failure somewhere in your body?
Abe: (Points to chest.) Here, in my chest. There’s this heaviness.

   Next, we collaboratively decide not to focus on this current situation at the moment. Instead, I take advantage of Abe’s negative mood state to identify an important early experience, in which the same core belief had been activated. I ask him to imagine the scene. Then we discuss the memory on the intellectual level, and I help Abe see an alternative explanation for his mother’s outburst in which she blamed and criticized him.

Judith: When is the first time you remember feeling this way, as a kid?
Abe: (pause) Probably when I was about 11 or 12. I remember my mother coming home really late from work because she had missed her bus. She got really upset with me because my brothers were playing with colored clay in the kitchen and it was all over the table and on the floor.
Judith: Can you picture the scene in your mind? Were you and your brothers and mom in the kitchen?
Abe: Yes.
Judith: What did her face look like? What did she say?
Abe: Well, she looked pretty mad. She really yelled. She said something like “Abe, what am I going to do with you? Just look at this place!”
Judith: What did you say?
Abe: I don’t think I said anything. My mom kept yelling at me. She said something like “Don’t you know how hard I work? I don’t ask you to do much. But why did you let your brothers get clay all over the place. You should have been watching them. Is that really so hard to do?”
Judith: [empathizing] You must have felt pretty bad.
Abe: I did.
Judith: Do you think this was a reasonable way for her to act?
Abe: (Thinks.) I don’t know . . . She was pretty tired and stressed out.
Judith: Is this something you found yourself saying a lot to your own kids?
Abe: No. I never said anything like that. I didn’t expect them to look after each other.
Judith: Can you remember when your son was 11 years old—and your daughter was, what, 8?
Abe: Yes.
Judith: If you had come home one day after work, you were really late and really tired and stressed out, and the table and floor were covered with clay, what would you have said to them?
Abe: Umm . . . I guess I’d have said something like—“Uh-oh. Okay, there’s clay all over the table and on the floor. Stop what you’re doing and clean it up. And next time, don’t let it get so messy.”
Judith: That’s really good. Do you have any idea why your mother didn’t just ask you to clean up the clay?
Abe: I’m not sure.
Judith: I wonder, from what you’ve told me before, if it could be because she was overwhelmed with being a single parent. I wonder whether seeing the kitchen messy made her feel out of control.
Abe: That’s probably right. It was hard for her.

   Next, I change the focus so Abe can engage in experiential learning through role play. Initially he plays his mother; then we switch roles and he plays himself.

Judith: Okay, how about if we do a role play? I’ll play you at age 11; you play your mom. Try to see things from her point of view as much as you can. You start. You’ve just come home from work, you see clay all over the table and the floor, and you say . . .
Abe: [as Mom] Abe, look at this mess. You should have stopped your brothers. Judith: [as Abe] Mom, I’m sorry. It is a mess. I’ll start cleaning it up.
Abe: Don’t you know how hard I work? Is it really too much to expect you to watch your brothers?
Judith: I was watching them, and I did tell them to clean up, but they wouldn’t listen to me.
Abe: You have to make them.
Judith: I don’t know how to do that. I’m only 11. You’re expecting too much from me. I’ll clean it up now. I don’t know why you’re making such a big deal out of this. You’re making me feel like such a failure. Is that what you think I am?
Abe: No, I don’t want you to think that. It’s not true. I just want you to do better.

   Next, I help Abe draw a different conclusion about the experience:

Judith: Okay, out of role. What do you think?
Abe: I wasn’t really a failure. I did most things okay. Mom was probably just really stressed.
Judith: How much do you believe that? Abe: I think I do believe it.
Judith: How about if we do the role-play again, but this time we’ll switch parts. You be your 11-year-old self, and let’s see how well you can talk back to your mom.

   


   Following this second role play, I ask Abe to summarize what he learned. Then we discuss how his conclusions apply to the current situation in which his ex-wife called him a failure.

Technique 2: Restructuring the Meaning of Early Experience through Reenactment and Older Client–Younger Client Role Play. This technique starts out in the same way. Here are the steps:
       1. Identify a specific situation that is currently quite distressing to a client and is associated with an important dysfunctional belief. Heighten the clients’ affect by focusing on her automatic thoughts, emotions, and somatic sensations.
       2. Help the client identify a relevant early experience by asking, “When do you remember feeling like this when you were growing up?” or “When is the earliest time you remember believing this about yourself? [or ‘When did your belief get much stronger?’]” Elicit a description of a specific situation and the meaning the client put to it. Use Socratic questioning to help her reframe the dysfunctional belief that had been activated.
       3. Ask the client to reexperience the situation as if she is the child (the “younger self”) and as if it is happening to her right then. Until you’re finished with the technique, speak to the younger self using vocabulary and concepts appropriate for her developmental level. As she tells you about the experience, elicit automatic thoughts, emotions, and beliefs of the younger self. Ask her to rate how much she believes her beliefs. (You often need to give the younger self a multiple choice: “Do you believe it a little? A medium amount? A lot?” If you ask the younger self for a percentage, she will mentally shift to her older [current] self.) Ask the client to continue to imagine the scene, always speaking as the younger self, using the present tense, until the trauma is over and she’s in a safer place.
       4. Ask the younger self if she wants to have her older self come into the scene (the safer place) and help her understand what happened. Facilitate a dialogue between the younger self (the emotional mind) and the older self (the intellectual mind) to reframe the dysfunctional belief. If the younger self is confused or doesn’t believe her older self, make suggestions to the older self about what she can say (using developmentally appropriate language and concepts).
       5. Ask the younger self to re-rate how much she now believes the dysfunctional belief. If her degree of belief has reduced, ask the younger self if she has anything else she wants to ask or say to her older self; then facilitate their saying good-bye.
       6. Ask the client, “What do you conclude from what we’ve just done?” A typical conclusion is that the dysfunctional belief was not true, or certainly, not completely true, and that the younger self was vulnerable and deserved protection and good treatment. The client may also agree to begin talking to herself in a more compassionate manner (in the way her older self talked to her younger self) as part of her Action Plan.
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
   REFERENCES
Abbott, R. A., Whear, R., Rodgers, L. R., Bethel, A., Coon, J. T., Kuyken, W., . . . Dickens, C. (2014). Effectiveness of mindfulness-based stress reduction and mindfulness based cognitive therapy in vascular disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 76(5), 341–351.
Alford, B. A., & Beck, A. T. (1997). The integrative power of cognitive therapy. New York: Guilford Press.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (Eds.). (2010). Handbook of assessment and treatment planning for psychological disorders (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Arnkoff, D. B., & Glass, C. R. (1992). Cognitive therapy and psychotherapy integration. In D. K. Freedheim (Ed.), History of psychotherapy: A century of change (pp. 657–694). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Bannink, F. (2012). Practicing positive CBT: From reducing distress to building success. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Beck, A. (2016). Transcultural cognitive behavior therapy for anxiety and depression. New York: Routledge.
Beck, A. T. (1964). Thinking and depression: II. Theory and therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 10, 561–571.
Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression: Causes and treatment. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New York: International Universities Press.
        Beck, A. T. (1987). Cognitive approaches to panic disorder: Theory and therapy. In S. Rachman & J. Maser (Eds.), Panic: Psychological perspectives (pp. 91–109). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Beck, A. T. (1999). Cognitive aspects of personality disorders and their relation to syndromal disorders: A psychoevolutionary approach. In C. R. Cloninger (Ed.), Personality and psychopathology (pp. 411–429). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Beck, A. T. (2005). The current state of cognitive therapy: A 40-year retrospective. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 953–959.
Beck, A. T. (2019). A 60-year evolution of cognitive theory and therapy. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 14(1), 16–20.
Beck, A. T., & Beck, J. S. (1991). The personality belief questionnaire. Philadelphia: Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy.
Beck, A. T., Davis, D. D., & Freeman, A. (Eds.). (2015). Cognitive therapy of personality disorders (3rd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Beck, A. T., & Emery, G. (with Greenberg, R. L.). (1985). Anxiety disorders and phobias: A cognitive perspective. New York: Basic Books.
Beck, A. T., Finkel, M. R., & Beck, J. S. (2020). The theory of modes: Applications to schizophrenia and other psychological conditions. Cognitive Therapy and Research.
Beck, A. T., Perivoliotis, D., Brinen, A. P., Inverso, E., & Grant, P. M. (in press).
Recovery-oriented cognitive therapy for schizophrenia and serious mental health conditions. New York: Guilford Press.
Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford Press.
Beck, A. T., & Steer, R. A. (1993a). Beck Anxiety Inventory. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A. T., & Steer, R. A. (1993b). Beck Hopelessness Scale. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory–II. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A. T., Wright, F. D., Newman, C. F., & Liese, B. S. (1993). Cognitive therapy of substance abuse. New York: Guilford Press.
Beck, J. S. (2001). A cognitive therapy approach to medication compliance. In J. Kay (Ed.), Integrated treatment of psychiatric disorders (pp. 113–141). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Beck, J. S. (2005). Cognitive therapy for challenging problems: What to do when the basics don’t work. New York: Guilford Press.
Beck, J. S. (2007). The Beck diet solution: Train your brain to think like a thin person. Birmingham, AL: Oxmoor House.
Beck, J. S. (2018). CBT worksheet packet. Philadelphia: Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy.
Beck, J. S. (2020). Coping with depression. Philadelphia: Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy.
Bennett-Levy, J., Butler, G., Fennell, M., Hackman, A., Mueller, M., & Westbrook, D. (Eds.). (2004). Oxford guide to behavioral experiments in cognitive therapy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Bennett-Levy, J., & Thwaites, R. (2007). Self and self-reflection in the therapeutic relationship. In P. Gilbert & R. L. Leahy (Eds.), The therapeutic relationship in the cognitive behavioral psychotherapies (pp. 255–281). New York: Routledge/ Taylor & Francis.
Bennett-Levy, J., Thwaites, R., Haarhoff, B., & Perry, H. (2015). Experiencing CBT from the inside out: A self-practice/self-reflection workbook for therapists. New York: Guilford Press.
Benson, H. (1975). The relaxation response. New York: Avon.
Bishop, S. R., Lau, M., Shapiro, S., Carlson, L., Anderson, N. D., Carmody, J., . . . Devins, G. (2004). Mindfulness: A proposed operational definition. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11(3), 230–241.
Boisvert, C. M., & Ahmed, M. (2018). Using diagrams in psychotherapy: A guide to visually enhanced therapy. New York: Routledge.
Boswell, J. F., Kraus, D. R., Miller, S. D., & Lambert, M. J. (2015). Implementing routine outcome monitoring in clinical practice: Benefits, challenges, and solutions. Psychotherapy Research: Building Collaboration and Communication between Researchers and Clinicians, 25(1), 6–19.
Braun, J. D., Strunk, D. R., Sasso, K. E., & Cooper, A. A. (2015). Therapist use of Socratic questioning predicts session-to-session symptom change in cognitive therapy for depression. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 70, 32–37.
Burns, D. D. (1980). Feeling good: The new mood therapy. New York: Signet.
Butler, A. C., Chapman, J. E., Forman, E. M., & Beck, A. T. (2006). The empirical status of cognitive-behavioral therapy: A review of meta-analyses. Clinical Psychology Review, 26, 17–31.
Callan, J. A., Kazantzis, N., Park, S. Y., Moore, C., Thase, M. E., Emeremni, C. A., . . . Siegle, G. J. (2019). Effects of cognitive behavior therapy homework adherence on outcomes: Propensity score analysis. Behavior Therapy, 50(2), 285–299.
Carpenter, J. K., Andrews, L. A., Witcraft, S. M., Powers, M. B., Smits, J. A., & Hofmann, S. G. (2018). Cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety and related disorders: A meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled trials. Depression and Anxiety, 35(6), 502–514.
Chambless, D., & Ollendick, T. H. (2001). Empirically supported psychological interventions. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 685–716.
Chaves, C., Lopez-Gomez, I., Hervas, G., & Vazquez, C. (2019). The integrative positive psychological intervention for depression (IPPI-D). Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 49(3), 177–185.
Chiesa, A., & Serretti, A. (2011). Mindfulness based cognitive therapy for psychiatric disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychiatry Research, 187(3), 441–453.
Clark, D. A., Beck, A. T., & Alford, B. A. (1999). Scientific foundations of cognitive theory and therapy of depression. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Clark, D. M. (1989). Anxiety states: Panic and generalized anxiety. In K. Hawton, P. M. Salkovskis, J. Kirk, & D. M. Clark (Eds.), Cognitive-behavior therapy for psychiatric problems: A practical guide (pp. 52–96). New York: Oxford University Press.
Constantino, M. J., Ametrano, R. M., & Greenberg, R. P. (2012). Clinician interventions and participant characteristics that foster adaptive patient expectations for psychotherapy and psychotherapeutic change. Psychotherapy, 49(4), 557–569.
Craske, M. G., Treanor, M., Conway, C. C., Zbozinek, T., & Vervliet, B. (2014). Maximizing exposure therapy: An inhibitory learning approach. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 58, 10–23.
Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., & Warmerdam, L. (2007). Behavioral activation treatments of depression: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 27, 318–326.
D’Zurilla, T. J., & Nezu, A. M. (2006). Problem-solving therapy: A positive approach to clinical intervention (3rd ed.). New York: Springer.
David, D., Cristea, I., & Hofmann, S. G. (2018). Why cognitive behavioral therapy is the current gold standard of psychotherapy. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 9, 4.
Davis, M., Eshelman, E. R., & McKay, M. (2008). The relaxation and stress reduction workbook (6th ed.). Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
de Jonge, M., Bockting, C. L., Kikkert, M. J., van Dijk, M. K., van Schaik, D. J., Peen, J., . . . Dekker, J. J. (2019). Preventive cognitive therapy versus care as usual in cognitive behavioral therapy responders: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 87(6), 521.
De Oliveira, I. R. (2018). Trial-based cognitive therapy. In S. Borgo, I. Marks, & L. Sibilia (Eds.), Common language for psychotherapy procedures: The first 101 (pp. 202–204). Rome: Centro per la Ricerca in Psicoterapia.
De Shazer, S. (1988). Clues: Investigating solutions in brief therapy. New York: Norton.
DeRubeis, R. J., & Feeley, M. (1990). Determinants of change in cognitive therapy for depression. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 14, 469–482.
Dobson, D., & Dobson, K. S. (2018). Evidence-based practice of cognitive-behavioral therapy. New York: Guilford Press.
Dobson, K. S., & Dozois, D. J. A. (2009). Historical and philosophical bases of the cognitive-behavioral therapies. In K. S. Dobson (Ed.), Handbook of cognitivebehavioral therapies (3rd ed., pp. 3–37). New York: Guilford Press.
Dobson, K. S., Hollon, S. D., Dimidjian, S., Schmaling, K. B., Kohlenberg, R. J., Gallop, R. J., . . . Jacobson, N. S. (2008). Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and antidepressant medication in the prevention of relapse and recurrence in major depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76(3), 468–477.
Dunn, B. D. (2012). Helping depressed clients reconnect to positive emotion experience: Current insights and future directions. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 19(4), 326–340.
Dutra, L., Stathopoulou, G., Basden, S. L., Leyro, T. M., Powers, M. B., & Otto, M. W. (2008). A meta-analytic review of psychosocial interventions for substance use disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(2), 179–187.
Elliott, R., Bohart, A. C., Watson, J. C., & Greenberg, L. S. (2011). Empathy. Psychotherapy, 48(1), 43–49.
Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy. New York: Lyle Stuart.
Ezzamel, S., Spada, M. M., & Nik?evi?, A. V. (2015). Cognitive-behavioural case formulation in the treatment of a complex case of social anxiety disorder and substance misuse. In M. Bruch (Ed.), Beyond diagnosis: Case formulation in cognitive-behavioural psychotherapy (pp. 194–219). London: Wiley.
Fairburn, C. G., Bailey-Straebler, S., Basden, S., Doll, H. A., Jones, R., Murphy, R., . . . Cooper, Z. (2015). A transdiagnostic comparison of enhanced cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT-E) and interpersonal psychotherapy in the treatment of eating disorders. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 70, 64–71.
Foa, E. B., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1998). Treating the trauma of rape: Cognitivebehavioral therapy for PTSD. New York: Guilford Press.
Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions in positive psychology: The broaden-and-build theory of positive emotions. American Psychologist, 56, 218–226.
Frisch, M. B. (2005). Quality of life therapy. New York: Wiley.
Goldstein, A. (1962). Therapist-patient expectancies in psychotherapy. New York: Pergamon Press.
Goldstein, A., & Stainback, B. (1987). Overcoming agoraphobia: Conquering fear of the outside world. New York: Viking Penguin.
Gottman, J., & Gottman, J. S. (2014). Level 2 clinical training: Gottman method couples therapy [DVD]. Seattle, WA: Gottman Institute.
Gould, R. L., Coulson, M. C., & Howard, R. J. (2012). Efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety disorders in older people: A meta-analysis and meta-regression of randomized controlled trials. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 60(2), 218–229.
Grant, P. M., Bredemeier, K., & Beck, A. T. (2017). Six-month follow-up of recovery-oriented cognitive therapy for low-functioning individuals with schizophrenia. Psychiatric Services, 68(10), 997–1002.
Grant, P. M., Huh, G. A., Perivoliotis, D., Stolar, N. M., & Beck, A. T. (2012). Randomized trial to evaluate the efficacy of cognitive therapy for lowfunctioning patients with schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69(2), 121–127.
Greenberg L. S. (2002). Emotion focused therapy: Coaching clients to work through their feelings. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Hackmann, A., Bennett-Levy, J., & Holmes, E. A. (2011). Oxford guide to imagery in cognitive therapy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Hall, J., Kellett, S., Berrios, R., Bains, M. K., & Scott, S. (2016). Efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety disorder in older adults: Systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 24(11), 1063–1073.
Hanrahan, F., Field, A. P., Jones, F. W., & Davey, G. C. L. (2013). A meta-analysis of cognitive therapy for worry in generalized anxiety disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 33, 120–132.
Hayes, S. C., Follette, V. M., & Linehan, M. M. (Eds.). (2004). Mindfulness and acceptance: Expanding the cognitive-behavioral tradition. New York: Guilford Press.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and commitment therapy: An experiential approach to behavior change. New York: Guilford Press.
Hays, P. A. (2009). Integrating evidence-based practice, cognitive-behavior therapy, and multicultural therapy: Ten steps for culturally competent practice. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 40(4), 354–360.
Heiniger, L. E., Clark, G. I., & Egan, S. J. (2018). Perceptions of Socratic and nonSocratic presentation of information in cognitive behavior therapy. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 58, 106–113.
Hofmann, S. G. (2016). Emotion in therapy: From science to practice. New York: Guilford Press.
Hofmann, S. G., Asnaani, A., Vonk, I. J., Sawyer, A. T., & Fang, A. (2012). The efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy: A review of meta-analyses. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 36(5), 427–440.
Hofmann, S. G., Sawyer, A. T., Witt, A. A., & Oh, D. (2010). The effect of mindfulness-based therapy on anxiety and depression: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78(2), 169–183.
Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Fawcett, J., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton, R. C., Zajecka, J., . . . Gallop, R. (2014). Effect of cognitive therapy with antidepressant medications vs antidepressants alone on the rate of recovery in major depressive disorder: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 71(10), 1157–1164.
Ingram, R. E., & Hollon, S. D. (1986). Cognitive therapy for depression from an information processing perspective. In R. E. Ingram (Ed.), Personality, psychopathology, and psychotherapy series: Information processing approaches to clinical psychology (pp. 259–281). New York: Academic Press.
Iwamasa, G. Y., & Hays, P. A. (Eds.). (2019). Culturally responsive cognitive behavior therapy: Practice and supervision (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Jacobson, E. (1974). Progressive relaxation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, Midway Reprint.
Jeste, D. V., & Palmer, B. W. (2015). Positive psychiatry: A clinical handbook. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Johnstone, L., Whomsley, S., Cole, S., & Oliver, N. (2011). Good practice guidelines on the use of psychological formulation. Leicester, UK: British Psychological Society.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living. New York: Delta.
Kallapiran, K., Koo, S., Kirubakaran, R., & Hancock, K. (2015). Effectiveness of mindfulness in improving mental health symptoms of children and adolescents: A meta-analysis. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 20(4), 182–194.
Kazantzis, N., Luong, H. K., Usatoff, A. S., Impala, T., Yew, R. Y., & Hofmann, S. G. (2018). The processes of cognitive behavioral therapy: A review of metaanalyses. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 42(4), 349–357.
Kazantzis, N., Whittington, C., Zelencich, L., Kyrios, M., Norton, P. J., & Hofmann, S. G. (2016). Quantity and quality of homework compliance: A metaanalysis of relations with outcome in cognitive behavior therapy. Behavior Therapy, 47(5), 755–772.
King, B. R., & Boswell, J. F. (2019). Therapeutic strategies and techniques in early cognitive-behavioral therapy. Psychotherapy, 56(1), 35–40.
Knapp, P., Kieling, C., & Beck, A. T. (2015). What do psychotherapists do?: A systematic review and meta-regression of surveys. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 84(6), 377–378.
Kuyken, W., Padesky, C. A., & Dudley, R. (2009). Collaborative case conceptualization: Working effectively with clients in cognitive behavioral therapy. New York: Guilford Press.
Lambert, M. J., Whipple, J. L., Smart, D. W., Vermeersch, D. A., Nielsen, S. L., & Hawkins, E. J. (2001). The effects of providing therapists with feedback on patient progress during psychotherapy: Are outcomes enhanced? Psychotherapy Research, 11(1), 49–68.
Lambert, M. J., Whipple, J. L., Vermeersch, D. A., Smart, D. W., Hawkins, E. J., Nielsen, S. L., & Goates, M. (2002). Enhancing psychotherapy outcomes via providing feedback on client progress: A replication. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 9(2), 91–103.
Lazarus, A. A., & Lazarus, C. N. (1991). Multimodal life history inventory. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
Leahy, R. L. (2002). A model of emotional schemas. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 9(3), 177–190.
Leahy, R. L. (Ed.). (2018). Science and practice in cognitive therapy: Foundations, mechanisms, and applications. New York: Guilford Press.
Ledley, D. R., Marx, B. P., & Heimberg R. G. (2005). Making cognitive-behavioral therapy work: Clinical process for new practitioners. New York: Guilford Press.
Lee, J. Y., Dong, L., Gumport, N. B., & Harvey, A. G. (2020). Establishing the dose of memory support to improve patient memory for treatment and treatment outcome. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 68, 101526.
Lewinsohn, P. M., Sullivan, J. M., & Grosscup, S. J. (1980). Changing reinforcing events: An approach to the treatment of depression. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, and Training, 17(3), 322–334.
Linardon, J., Wade, T. D., de la Piedad Garcia, X., & Brennan, L. (2017). The efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy for eating disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 85(11), 1080–1094.
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford Press.
Linehan, M. M. (2015). DBT skills training manual (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Magill, M., & Ray, L. A. (2009). Cognitive-behavioral treatment with adult alcohol and illicit drug users: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 70(4), 516–527.
Martell, C., Addis, M., & Jacobson, N. (2001). Depression in context: Strategies for guided action. New York: Norton.
Matusiewicz, A. K., Banducci, A. N., & Lejuez, C. W. (2010). The effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy for personality disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 33(3), 657–685.
Mayo-Wilson, E., Dias, S., Mavranezouli, I., Kew, K., Clark, D. M., Ades, A. E., & Pilling, S. (2014). Psychological and pharmacological interventions for social anxiety disorder in adults: A systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry, 1(5), 368–376.
McCown, D., Reibel, D., & Micozzi, M. S. (2010). Teaching mindfulness: A practical guide for clinicians and educators. New York: Springer.
McCullough, J. P., Jr. (1999). Treatment for chronic depression: Cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press.
McEvoy, P. M., Saulsman, L. M., & Rapee, R. M. (2018). Imagery-enhanced CBT for social anxiety disorder. New York: Guilford Press.
Meichenbaum, D. (1977). Cognitive-behavior modification: An integrative approach. New York: Plenum Press.
Miller, S. D., Hubble, M. A., Chow, D., & Seidel, J. (2015). Beyond measures and monitoring: Realizing the potential of feedback-informed treatment. Psychotherapy, 52(4), 449–457.
Needleman, L. D. (1999). Cognitive case conceptualization: A guidebook for practitioners. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Norcross, J. C., & Lambert, M. J. (2018). Psychotherapy relationships that work: III. Psychotherapy, 55(4), 303–315.
Norcross, J. C., & Wampold, B. E. (2011). Evidence-based therapy relationships: Research conclusions and clinical practices. Psychotherapy, 48(1), 98–102.
Öst, L. G., Havnen, A., Hansen, B., & Kvale, G. (2015). Cognitive behavioral treatments of obsessive–compulsive disorder: A systematic review and metaanalysis of studies published 1993–2014. Clinical Psychology Review, 40, 156– 169.
Overholser, J. C. (2018). The Socratic method of psychotherapy. New York: Columbia University Press.
Padesky, C. A. (1994). Schema change processes in cognitive therapy. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 1(5), 267–278.
Padesky, C. A., & Mooney, K. A. (2005). Cognitive therapy for personality disorders: Constructing a new personality. Paper presented at the 5th International Congress of Cognitive Psychotherapy, Gotenburg, Sweden.
Persons, J. B. (2008). The case formulation approach to cognitive-behavior therapy. New York: Guilford Press.
Pugh, M. (2019). Cognitive behavioural chairwork: Distinctive features. Oxon, UK: Routledge.
Raue, P. J., & Goldfried, M. R. (1994). The therapeutic alliance in cognitivebehavioral therapy. In A. O. Horvath & L. S. Greenberg (Eds.), The working alliance: Theory, research, and practice (pp. 131–152). New York: Wiley.
Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1993). Cognitive processing therapy for rape victims: A treatment manual. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE.
Ritschel, L. A., & Sheppard, C. S. (2018). Hope and depression. In M. W. Gallagher & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of hope (pp. 209–219). New York: Oxford University Press.
Rosen, H. (1988). The constructivist–development paradigm. In R. A. Dorfman (Ed.), Paradigms of clinical social work (pp. 317–355). New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Rush, A. J., Beck, A. T., Kovacs, M., & Hollon, S. D. (1977). Comparative efficacy of cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy in the treatment of depressed outclients. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 1(1), 17–37.
Safran, J., & Segal, Z. V. (1996). Interpersonal process in cognitive therapy. Lanham, MD: Jason Aronson.
Salkovskis, P. M. (1996). The cognitive approach to anxiety: Threat beliefs, safetyseeking behavior, and the special case of health anxiety obsessions. In P. M. Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of cognitive therapy: The state of the art and beyond (pp. 48–74). New York: Guilford Press.
Segal, Z., Williams, M., & Teasdale, J. (2018). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Smith, T. B., Rodriguez, M. D., & Bernal, G. (2011). Culture. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
Snyder, C. R., Michael, S. T., & Cheavens, J. (1999). Hope as a psychotherapeutic foundation of common factors, placebos, and expectancies. In M. A. Hubble, B. Duncan, & S. Miller (Eds.), The heart and soul of change (pp. 179–200). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Stott, R., Mansell, W., Salkovskis, P., Lavender, A., & Cartwright-Hatton, S. (2010). Oxford guide to metaphors in CBT: Building cognitive bridges. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Sudak, D. M. (2011). Combining CBT and medication: An evidence-based approach. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Sue, S., Zane, N., Nagayama Hall, G. D., & Berger, L. K. (2009). The case for cultural competency in psychotherapeutic interventions. Annual Review of Psychology, 60, 525–548.
Swift, J. K., Greenberg, R. P., Whipple, J. L., & Kominiak, N. (2012). Practice recommendations for reducing premature termination in therapy. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 43, 379–387.
Tarrier, N. (Ed.). (2006). Case formulation in cognitive behavior therapy: The treatment of challenging and complex cases. New York: Routledge.
Thoma, N., Pilecki, B., & McKay, D. (2015). Contemporary cognitive behavior therapy: A review of theory, history, and evidence. Psychodynamic Psychiatry, 43(3), 423–461.
Tolin, D. F. (2016). Doing CBT: A comprehensive guide to working with behaviors, thoughts, and emotions. New York: Guilford Press.
Tompkins, M. A. (2004). Using homework in psychotherapy: Strategies, guidelines, and forms. New York: Guilford Press.
Tugade, M. M., Frederickson, B. L., & Barrett, L. F. (2004). Psychological resilience and positive emotional granularity: Examining the benefits of positive emotions on coping and health. Journal of Personality, 72(6), 1161–1190.
Vittengl, J. R., Stutzman, S., Atluru, A., & Jarrett, R. B. (in press). Do cognitive therapy skills neutralize lifetime stress to improve treatment outcomes in recurrent depression? Behavior Therapy.
von Brachel, R., Hirschfeld, G., Berner, A., Willutzki, U., Teismann, T., Cwik, J. C., . . . Margraf, J. (2019). Long-term effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy in routine outpatient care: A 5- to 20-year follow-up study. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 88(4), 225–235.
Weck, F., Kaufmann, Y. M., & Höfling, V. (2017). Competence feedback improves CBT competence in trainee therapists: A randomized controlled pilot study. Psychotherapy Research, 27(4), 501–509.
Weissman, A. N., & Beck, A. T. (1978). Development and validation of the Dysfunctional Attitude Scale: A preliminary investigation. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Toronto, Canada.
Wenzel, A., Brown, G. K., & Beck, A. T. (2009). Cognitive therapy for suicidal patients: Scientific and clinical applications. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Wuthrich, V. M., & Rapee, R. M. (2013). Randomised controlled trial of group cognitive behavioural therapy for comorbid anxiety and depression in older adults. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51(12), 779–786.
Young, J. E. (1999). Cognitive therapy for personality disorders: A schema-focused approach (3rd ed.). Sarasota, FL: Professional Resource.
Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema therapy: A practitioner’s guide. New York: Guilford Press.
Zilcha-Mano, S., Errázuriz, P., Yaffe-Herbst, L., German, R. E., & DeRubeis, R. J. (2019). Are there any robust predictors of “sudden gainers,” and how is sustained improvement in treatment outcome achieved following a gain? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 87(6), 491–500.
