COGNITIVE
BEHAVIOR
T H E R A P Y
BASICS AND BEYOND
THIRD EDITION
Judith S. Beck
Foreword by Aaron T. Beck
THE GUILFORD PRESS
New York London


Copyright © 2021 Judith S. Beck Published by The Guilford Press A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc.
370 Seventh Avenue, Suite 1200, New York, NY 10001
www.guilford.com
All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Last digit is print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
The author has checked with sources believed to be reliable in her effort to provide information that is complete and generally in accord with the standards of practice that are accepted at the time of publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error or changes in behavioral, mental health, or medical sciences, neither the author, nor the editors and publisher, nor any other party who has been involved in the preparation or publication of this work warrants that the information contained herein is in every respect accurate or complete, and they are not responsible
for any errors or omissions or the results obtained from the use of such information. Readers are encouraged to confirm the information contained in this book with other sources.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Beck, Judith S., author.
Title: Cognitive behavior therapy : basics and beyond / Judith S. Beck. Description: Third edition. | New York : The Guilford Press, [2021] |
Includes bibliographical references and index. Identifiers: LCCN 2020006172 | ISBN 9781462544196 (cloth) Subjects: LCSH: Cognitive therapy.
Classification: LCC RC489.C63 B43 2021 | DDC 616.89/1425—dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020006172

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
       Judith S. Beck, PhD, is President of the Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy (www.beckinstitute.org), a nonprofit organization that provides state-of-the-art training and certification in CBT to individuals and organizations, offers online courses on a variety of CBT topics, conducts research, and serves as a leading global resource in CBT. She is also Clinical Professor of Psychology in Psychiatry at the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine. Dr. Beck has written over 100 articles and chapters as well as several books for professionals and general readers, including Cognitive Therapy for Challenging Problems: What to Do When the Basics Don’t Work. She has made hundreds of presentations around the world on topics related to CBT, is codeveloper of the Beck Youth Inventories and the Personality Belief Questionnaire, and has won numerous awards for her contributions to the field. She also continues to treat clients at the Beck Institute’s in-house clinic in suburban Philadelphia

FOREWORD
   Iam delighted that this third edition of Cognitive Behavior Therapy:
Basics and Beyond is being published. The field of cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) has grown by leaps and bounds in the past decade alone. One factor that makes this new edition so valuable is its adaptation of techniques from a wide variety of psychotherapies into treatment, in the context of the cognitive model. You’ll find important interventions from acceptance and commitment therapy, dialectical behavior therapy, mindfulness-based cognitive therapy, and others. Equally important, though, is its emphasis on a recovery or strengthsbased orientation as part of the foundation of CBT. A single depressed client is followed throughout the book, along with opportunities to stream the videos of therapy sessions and download worksheets. A second, more complex client is also portrayed throughout the book to illustrate variations of treatment when difficulties arise.
When I first developed cognitive therapy in the 1960s and 1970s, I focused the conceptualization and treatment of individuals on their problems, negative cognitions, and dysfunctional coping strategies. By the mid-1980s, I could claim that cognitive therapy had attained the status of a “system of psychotherapy.” It consisted of (1) a theory of personality and psychopathology with solid empirical findings to support its basic postulates; (2) a model of psychotherapy with sets of principles and strategies that blended with the theory of psychopathology; and (3) solid empirical findings based on clinical outcome studies to support the efficacy of this approach.
       Now, at the start of the third decade of the third millennium, we have developed a different focus in conceptualization and treatment. While negative aspects of individuals’ experiences are still important, it is at least equally important to conceptualize individuals’ aspirations, values, goals, strengths, and resources, and to incorporate these positive characteristics in helping them to take specific steps that are linked to what is most important to them. It’s also critical to anticipate obstacles to taking these steps, to use basic CBT skills (such as cognitive restructuring, problem solving, and skills training) to overcome the obstacles, and to help individuals draw positive conclusions about what their experiences say about them.
       This third edition of the basic text in the field offers readers fresh insights into 21st-century CBT and will be important for those who are already proficient in traditional CBT as well as students new to the field. Given the tremendous amount of new research and expansion of ideas that continue to move the field in exciting new directions, I applaud the efforts to expand this volume to incorporate some of the different ways of conceptualizing and treating our clients.
       The applications of CBT to a host of psychological and medical disorders extend far beyond anything I could have imagined when I treated my first few depressed and anxious clients with cognitive therapy. The formidable array of different applications of CBT is based on fundamental principles outlined in this volume. This book was written by Dr. Judith Beck, one of the foremost second-generation CBT educators, who, as a teenager, was one of the first to listen to me expound on my new theory. It will help aspiring therapists to learn the cutting-edge nuts and bolts of this therapy. Even CBT therapists who are skilled at delivering traditional CBT should find this book quite helpful in adopting a strengths-based approach, sharpening their conceptualization skills, expanding their repertoire of therapeutic techniques, planning more effective treatment, and troubleshooting difficulties in therapy. Of course, no book can substitute for supervision in CBT. But this book is an important volume and can enrich the supervision experience.
       Dr. Judith Beck is eminently qualified to offer this guide to CBT. For the past 35 years, she has conducted many hundreds of workshops and trainings in CBT all over the world as well as online, supervised both beginners and experienced therapists, helped develop treatment protocols for various disorders, and participated actively in CBT research. With such a background to draw on, she has written a book with a rich lode of information to apply this therapy, the earlier editions of which have been the leading CBT texts in most graduate psychology, psychiatry, social work, and counseling programs.
       The practice of CBT is not simple. Too many mental health professionals call themselves CBT therapists but lack even the most basic conceptual and treatment skills. The purpose of Dr. Judith Beck’s book is to educate, to teach, and to train both the novice and the experienced therapist in CBT, and she has succeeded admirably in this mission.
Aaron T. Beck, MD

PREFACE
   I’m excited to introduce this third edition of Cognitive Behavior Therapy: Basics and Beyond to you. Before beginning this revision, I asked for feedback on the second edition from health and mental health practitioners all over the world. What would they like to see improved? What worked and what didn’t? The responses I received were excellent and really helped me conceptualize the changes and additions I chose to make. This edition incorporates the feedback I received from many readers and reflects the most recent research and current directions for the field of cognitive behavior therapy (CBT).
       Readers consistently commented that they wanted to see a more complex client to serve as the key example throughout the book. “Abe,” the client illustration in this edition, is more severely depressed than “Sally,” the client who appeared throughout the second edition. In addition to depression, Abe also struggles with moderate anxiety and complicating problems including unemployment and a recent divorce. I have also included a second client example, “Maria,” who has borderline personality traits. I’ve included links so you can watch videos of full and partial therapy sessions with Abe and you can download worksheets.
       Another important change is that I’ve revised much of the material to include both our traditional orientation and also a recovery orientation. Recovery-oriented cognitive therapy (CT-R) is a cuttingedge evidence-based treatment for individuals diagnosed with severe mental illness, including schizophrenia, many of whom have been hospitalized for decades. CT-R was developed, and is currently being researched, by my father, Dr. Aaron T. Beck, and his research/training group, which is now part of the Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy. Our other clinician/educators and I have been adapting this approach for use with our nonhospitalized clients who experience a wide range of psychiatric disorders, psychological problems, and medical conditions with psychological components. The recovery orientation focuses on identifying clients’ values and aspirations (and the meaning of their aspirations) and helping them create a sense of purpose and empowerment in their lives by taking steps each week in pursuit of their goals. We also focus on helping clients reach positive conclusions about themselves, others, and their future as a result of taking these positive actions, and we identify and reinforce their positive qualities, skills, and resources. We emphasize experiencing positive emotion both in and out of sessions. We expect that the recovery movement will play a large role in shaping the future of CBT, and psychotherapy in general, in the coming years and decades.
       Finally, I have written this edition in a more reader-friendly style. When I teach workshops at the Beck Institute in Philadelphia, or online courses, I often include anecdotes from my own clinical practice. I also encourage participants to take part in interactive activities, where I ask them to role-play with another participant, respond to questions, and present their own challenging cases for feedback and discussion. Most participants find these interactive components to be very meaningful and inspiring. In this edition of the book, I not only use a more personal approach in my writing but also have included clinical tips from my own practice, reflection questions, and suggested activities to help readers engage with the material.
       I hope you enjoy reading this book as much as I enjoyed writing it. I always say that learning CBT is a lifelong endeavor. No matter where you are on your journey, I hope this book inspires you to learn more about CBT.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
   At the age of 98, Aaron Beck, my father, is still teaching me about cognitive behavior therapy (CBT). Most recently, he and our colleagues at the Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, in suburban Philadelphia, have developed, and are researching, recovery-oriented cognitive therapy (CT-R) for individuals diagnosed with serious mental health conditions. I have been applying CT-R to the clients I treat in our outpatient clinic with great results. I’m very excited about this new development in the field, with its emphasis on motivating clients through identifying their aspirations and values, meaning and purpose; focusing on their strengths and resources; helping them overcome obstacles to working toward their aspirations each week; and drawing positive conclusions about their experiences and themselves. I am grateful to my father and to our CT-R team, headed by Paul Grant and Ellen Inverso, for inspiring the recovery orientation I have included in this book.
       I am equally fortunate to interact with our team of excellent clinicians, Rob Hindman, Norman Cotterell, Fran Broder, and Allen Miller. They treat clients, teach at our workshops, supervise therapists (from beginners to experts), and participate in program development. I learn so much by discussing my clients with them every week at our case conferences. They and Brianna Bliss helped improve this manuscript.
       I am also grateful to Lisa Pote who has transformed the Beck Institute into a worldwide training and resource center, and Kitty Moore of The Guilford Press, who has been my friend and editor for nearly 25 years. And great thanks to my husband, Richard Busis, who provided daily encouragement and final edits to the manuscript.
       And a last note of overwhelming gratitude to my most excellent and wonderful assistant, Sarah Fleming, who helped in immeasurable ways in getting this book to press.
Thank you all.

CONTENTS
1. Introduction to Cognitive Behavior Therapy 12. Overview of Treatment 163. Cognitive Conceptualization 264. The Therapeutic Relationship 565. The Evaluation Session 716. The First Therapy Session 877. Activity Scheduling 1178. Action Plans 1359. Treatment Planning 16010. Structuring Sessions 17411. Problems in Structuring Sessions 19212. Identifying Automatic Thoughts 21013. Emotions 22714. Evaluating Automatic Thoughts 23915. Responding to Automatic Thoughts 26016. Integrating Mindfulness into CBT 27317. Introduction to Beliefs 28218. Modifying Beliefs 30319. Additional Techniques 32220. Imagery 34021. Termination and Relapse Prevention 35322. Problems in Therapy 365
APPENDIX A. CBT Resources 377APPENDIX B. Beck Institute Case WriteUp: Summary and Conceptualization379APPENDIX C. Steps in the AWARE Technique 386APPENDIX D. Restructuring the Meaning of Early Memories through Experiential Techniques387References 391Index 401
